hello and welcome to another video
today's topic is psychology and trading
in today's video I will try to present
what separates winning traders from
losing traders in regards to psychology
I recently read the book trading in the
zone by Mark Douglas mark Douglas is of
the opinion that the main factor
separating winning from losing traders
is the mindset and in the book he then
tries to teach how you can acquire the
correct winning mindset in this video I
will try to present some of his and some
of my own points to developing a winning
attitude in trading but first off why
psychology and trading even important
trading is a very unique activity it's
unlike every other activity that I can
imagine in some cases even contradict
some beliefs that we have acquired
throughout our lives let me give an
example of this most people think that
the more work you put into something the
better results you will get for instance
most jobs are paid on a per hour basis
but this isn't necessarily the case for
trading just because you spend countless
hours analyzing the fundamentals the
technicals or anything else of an asset
doesn't mean that you will make money
you may very well even lose money and a
trade that you spend countless hours
preparing trading is a very emotionally
demanding activity seeing your
hard-earned money vanish in front of
your eyes isn't easy but also huge gains
do affect your emotions trading
confronts us with constant uncertainty
may very well lose money on a day but
you may also very well make money it's
not uncommon to see people lose weeks or
even months of gains on one bad trade
nevertheless it is important to
try to avoid emotional trading letting
emotions influence your trading
decisions can dramatically decrease your
trading performance it can be very hard
to control your emotions when
hard-earned money is on the line
Mark Douglas presents five so-called
fundamental truths in his book to help
traders develop a winning mindset I will
now present these five fundamental
truths the first truth is anything can
happen in essence the markets aren't
anything else than millions of different
people expressing their thoughts about
different assets people that think in
assets prices low will likely buy those
that think in assets prices high will
sell and others will wait for a better
opportunity but every single trader of
these millions of people can impact the
price therefore theoretically anything
is possible but even though everything
is possible not everything is likely the
probability that an assets price will
rise by hundreds of percent is
relatively slim however the probability
is not zero it is possible this brings
us to the second fundamental truth you
don't need to know what is going to
happen next in order to make money you
don't only don't need to know what is
going to happen next
you can't know what is going to happen
next we just learned that the markets
aren't anything else and millions of
people expressing their beliefs if you
know what's going to happen next you
would have to be familiar with the
beliefs of all of these millions of
people interacting with the markers it's
safe to say that this is impossible but
that doesn't matter you can still make
money in the markets if you have the
trading system with the true edge it
really does not matter what's going to
happen next the outcome of
next trade is irrelevant Mark Douglas
he's a casino as an example to explain
this a casino has a true edge the odds
are on their side
let's take roulette as an example the
casino has a higher probability of
making than losing money on a game of
roulette however they do not know what's
going to happen on the next roulette
spin nor do they care they may very well
lose money on the next spin of roulette
but that doesn't matter to them because
they know that they will win in the long
run the same goes for your trading as
long as you have a trading system with
the real edge all you have to do is
stick to that trading system the outcome
of your next one two or even more trades
does not matter as long as you stick to
your plan the numbers will work
themselves out in the long run
the next fundamental truth is there's a
random distribution between wins and
losses for any given set of variables
that define an edge this goes
hand-in-hand with the previous truth
just because the odds are in your favor
does not mean that you will be right
let's look at our casino example once
again the odds of winning a game of
roulette are strongly in the favor of
the casino however that does not mean
that they will win guaranteed they will
still lose money on some games Mark
Douglas explains this with the brief
example of a coin flip here is a short
extract from the book if you really
believe in a random distribution between
wins and losses could you really ever
feel betrayed by the market if you flip
the coin and guess right you wouldn't
necessarily expect to be right on the
next flip simply because you were right
on the last no would you expect to be
wrong on the next flip if you were wrong
on the last flip let's move on to the
fourth fundamental truth
an edge is nothing more than an
indication of a higher probability of
one thing happening over another
hopefully this is relatively simple by
now once again I'd used the casino
example to explain this in a game of
roulette the casino has a higher
probability of making than losing money
so that is their edge the final
fundamental truth is every moment in the
market is unique if this wouldn't be the
case it would mean that every single
person and entity that interacted with
the market during a previous moment
would have to do the exact same thing
again they would all have to enter and
exit their positions just like last time
this is more or less impossible and
therefore every moment in the market is
unique if a moment isn't unique you
would have to know every variable which
once again isn't possible so what are
the takeaways of these five fundamental
truths first of all you do need a
concrete trading system with concrete
rules otherwise you wouldn't have an
edge and then trading would be pointless
remember random trading will lead to
random results besides a trading system
you also need a trading plan you should
always create a trading plan before
every trade it's very important that you
create your trading plan before you open
a trade because that's the only moment
where you still are able to think 100
percent rationally after you enter a
trade your hard earned money is at risk
and then your emotions will influence
your decision making some key components
of your trading plan should be your max
risk your max reward your risk to reward
ratio your exit point your entry point
your adjustment point your position size
and ideally even more
if you truly believe in the five
fundamental truths you will
automatically create a trading plan
before every trade for instance if you
actually believed that you don't know
what's going to happen next and that
anything is possible you would always
define your risk and cut your loss if
you believed in your edge and all the
truth why would you do it from your
trading plan why would you revenge trade
or double up to make back the losses
from a previous trade why would you ever
feel emotional pain if you believed in
your edge does a casino feel emotional
pain just because it lost on a single
game of roulette no and neither should
you the more specific your trading plan
is the better if you have trouble
sticking to your trading plan write it
down in theory your trading plan should
be so concrete that you would be able to
give it to someone else who then could
execute the entire plan without having
to ask you the more specific a trading
plan is the less you will have to think
about what you're going to do and thus
you will trade more mechanically another
tip for trading more mechanically is
using trade alerts if you know that
they're going to exit or adjust a
position if a price reaches a certain
point you can set an alert at that point
as soon as that price will be reached
you will get notified and can adjust
your position without having to think
about it alternatively you could use
automated orders like stop losses or
take profit orders but probably one of
the most important takeaways of this
video is that you should trade small
should never risk more than a few
percent of your total capital on one
trade if you truly accept the risk
before entering a trade and keep your
position sizing small you will never
ever have trouble sleeping at night
remember that you don't and can't know
it's going to happen next and therefore
it's not unlikely that your next trade
will be a loser if you risk all of your
capsule at once and the next trade will
be a loser you will lose all of your
capital at once that's a disaster that
you should never risk this is also why
casinos said betting limits they know
that they can very well lose on a single
game of roulette if someone wants to bet
millions of dollars on a single game of
roulette the casino will likely decline
because it knows that the odds aren't
heavily in its favor their edge only
really works in the long run when the
number of occurrences is high enough you
should think the same way with your
trading so never risk too much of your
capital at once if you're currently
familiar with the seemingly profitable
trading system but somehow can't manage
to be consistently profitable with it it
might be due to your mindset so instead
of trying to learn tons of new trading
strategies you could try to focus more
on your psychology if you want to do so
I highly recommend trading in the zone
by Mark Douglas it's a superb book that
teaches you how to develop a winning
mindset it was filled with enlightening
our heart moments and in my opinion it's
a must read for any trader especially
for those that are struggling with
consistency thanks so much for watching
this video if you enjoy this kind of
content and want to learn more about
trading visits trade options with me
calm furthermore if you want to stay
tuned for similar content and want to
support this channel don't forget to
subscribe